For immediate release:
February 14, 2013
For more information, contact:
Elliott Shore, ARL Executive Director
elliott@arl.org

Brent Roe, CARL Executive Director
brent.roe@carl-abrc.ca

ARL-CARL Joint Statement in Support of Dale Askey and McMaster University
The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) and the Canadian Association of Research Libraries (CARL)
share a commitment to freedom of opinion and expression of ideas and are strongly opposed to any effort
to intimidate individuals in order to suppress information or censor ideas. We further share the belief that
a librarian must be able to offer his or her assessment of a publisher’s products or practices free from such
intimidation.
Consequently, we are highly supportive of Dale Askey and of McMaster University as they confront the
lawsuit brought against them by Edwin Mellen Press. We strongly disapprove of the aggressive use of
the Canadian court system to threaten Mr. Askey with millions of dollars in liability over the contents of a
blog post. We urge Edwin Mellen Press to withdraw this suit and use more constructive means to
address its reputation.
“No academic librarian, research library, or university should face a multi-million dollar lawsuit because
of a candid discussion of the publications or practices of an academic publisher,” said Brent Roe,
Executive Director of CARL. “The exaggerated action of Edwin Mellen Press could only impose a chill on
academic and research librarians’ expression of frank professional judgments.”
“Unfortunately, this is just the latest publisher that has chosen to pursue costly and wasteful litigation
against universities and librarians,” said Elliott Shore, Executive Director of ARL. “These hostile tactics
highlight the need for people who share the core values of research libraries to embrace models of
publishing that foster—rather than hinder—research, teaching, and learning.”

The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) is a nonprofit organization of 125 research libraries in the US
and Canada. Its mission is to influence the changing environment of scholarly communication and the
public policies that affect research libraries and the diverse communities they serve. ARL pursues this
mission by advancing the goals of its member research libraries, providing leadership in public and
information policy to the scholarly and higher education communities, fostering the exchange of ideas
and expertise, facilitating the emergence of new roles for research libraries, and shaping a future
environment that leverages its interests with those of allied organizations. ARL is on the web at
http://www.arl.org/.
The Canadian Association of Research Libraries (CARL) provides leadership on behalf of Canada’s
research libraries and enhances their capacity to advance research and higher education. It promotes
effective and sustainable scholarly communication, and public policy that enables broad access to
scholarly information. Its members include the 29 major academic research libraries across Canada.
CARL is on the web at http://www.carl-abrc.ca/.
Together, ARL and CARL represent 136 research libraries in the United States and Canada.
###

