Page 4 of 12
The American literature on academic freedom repeatedly cites, with great approval, Mr. Justice
Brennan, writing in 1967 for the majority in the U.S. Supreme Court‟s Keyishian v. Board of
Regents:
“Our Nation is deeply committed to safeguarding academic freedom, which is of
transcendent value to all of us, and not merely to the teachers concerned. That freedom is
therefore a special concern of the First Amendment, which does not tolerate laws that
cast a pall of orthodoxy over the classroom.”8
The point being that academic freedom has mistakenly come to be understood as an individual
right when, in fact, it is a professional right. While we lack a “First Amendment” and have not
been able to defend academic freedom as has become the custom in the United States, it is not
uncommon to hear academic freedom described in Canada (especially among Canadian
academics) as if it were an individual right, rather than a special professional right, necessary for
academic staff to perform their responsibilities so the university can fulfill its purposes in our
society.
Interestingly, our courts have relatively rarely dealt with academic freedom precisely. In one of
the limited specific references, Madam Justice Wilson, in her dissent in McKinney v. University
of Guelph, a case on mandatory retirement, asserted that “the essential function which the
principle of academic freedom is intended to serve is the protection and encouragement of the free
flow of ideas.” She then continues by quoting from an essay by Frank Underhill (Underhill, “The
Scholar: Man Thinking,” in Whalley (ed.), A Place of Liberty (Toronto 1964)) at p. 68 that
academic freedom is a professional right:
“The claim of the university teacher is that he and his fellows, whatever their legal position
as employees, are in fact members of a professional community and should be considered to
enjoy the rights of a learned profession. That is, they collectively should determine what
shall be taught, how it shall be taught, who shall be qualified to do the teaching, and who
shall be qualified to receive the teaching. In a word, they should be self-governing as are the
members of other learned professions. Academic freedom is the collective freedom of a
profession and the individual freedom of the members of that profession.”9
While almost universally, there is broad acknowledgment of the importance of academic freedom, it
is a right that is consistently vulnerable and consistently at risk – from the dismissal of Bertrand
Russell from Trinity College, Cambridge, for his opposition to British participation in the first
World War, the dismissal and blacklisting of academics during the cold war period for being
“communists” to the sanctions against academics today who are seen to be overly critical of
corporate-university linkages, whose work is at odds with influential colleagues or donors, or who
are persistent critics of their institutional administrations.
8

http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/historics/USSC_CR_0385_0589_ZO.html
While many revere Brennan‟s formulation, the prevailing American jurisprudence on academic freedom has much
more frequently focused on academic freedom as institutional autonomy, a formulation that CAUT explicitly rejects.
9
http://scc.lexum.umontreal.ca/en/1990/1990scr3-229/1990scr3-229.html Accessed August 23, 2010.

